# Deep Learning Model for the Classification of Hand Gesture through Surface Electromyogram Recordings
## Motivation
In contrast to existing gesture recognition software predominantly reliant on computer vision techniques, our project takes a novel approach by focusing on the analysis of electrical signals generated directly from hand gestures. While computer vision-based methods may face challenges in varying lighting conditions or occlusions, our model based on surface electromyogram (sEMG) recordings offers a robust and reliable alternative. Our project can be used in combination with sEMG sensors to create a more accessible and natural human-computer interaction that can be applied to assistive technology and virtual reality applications. 
## Objective
Classifying hand gestures based off of surface electromyogram (sEMG) recordings.
## Background
Multiple datasets [1][2] have been created for the purpose of using machine learning algorithms to classify gestures based on sEMG recordings. This is a novel approach to gesture recognition. Most gesture recognition systems are based on either video cameras, depth sensors, or on the use of sensors and a glove [3]. Each of these methods come with its advantages and disadvantages. For example, video-based systems suffer from difficulties in extracting hands and segmenting them from the background. We are proposing an alternative solution to hand gesture recognition, the use of sEMG sensors. sEMG or Surface Electromyography is the process of measuring the electrical activity generated
by muscle action potentials. In simpler terms, it is the process of measuring the electrical signals that result in muscle contraction [4]. These sensors are non-intrusive and are attached directly to the patient's skin, similar to a sticker. Understanding the signals generated by our muscles can be immensely helpful not only in the field of human computer interaction but also can help doctors treat patients who are injured.
## References
[1] Pradhan, A., He, J. & Jiang, N. Multi-day dataset of forearm and wrist electromyogram for hand gesture recognition and biometrics. Sci Data 9, 733 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-022-01836-y \
\
[2] Ozdemir, M. A., Kisa, D. H., Guren, O., & Akan, A. (2022). Dataset for multi-channel surface electromyography (sEMG) signals of hand gestures. Data in brief, 41, 107921.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2022.107921 \
\
[3] J. Suarez and R. R. Murphy, "Hand gesture recognition with depth images: A review," 2012 IEEE RO-MAN: The 21st IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, Paris, France, 2012, pp. 411-417, doi: 10.1109/ROMAN.2012.6343787. \
\
[4] Neblett R. (2016). Surface Electromyographic (SEMG) Biofeedback for Chronic Low Back Pain. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 4(2), 27.
https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare4020027 \
\
[5] Sadhu, Sri Ravali, "Classification of sEMG signals and Motion data using learning algorithms with application to post-stroke impairment. " Master's Thesis, University of
Tennessee, 2019. https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_gradthes/5665
